Integrating the ISDS Nosology with the G2P Project and the MONDO Disease Ontology

Andreas Zankl 1,2,3

1.	Faculty of Medicine and Health,The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia
2.	Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia
3.	Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney, Australia

The G2P project (https://www.ebi.ac.uk/gene2phenotype) curates genotype-phenotype associations in rare genetic diseases for use in diagnostic variant filtering. The VEP-G2P plugin utilises this information to automatically annotate and score likely pathogenic variants in whole genome or whole exome datasets, greatly reducing the time needed for manual variant curation.
In G2P, each dataset is focused on a disease grouping that is of relevance to the clinical diagnosis of Mendelian disease. Currently, G2P datasets exist for Developmental Disorders (DDG2P), Eye Disorders (Eye G2P), Skin G2P (Skin G2P) and Cancer (Cancer G2P).

We describe some of the challenges we encountered in creating a G2P dataset for Skeletal Dysplasias (Skeletal G2P), based on the current ISDS Nosology.
Almost half of the disorders in the Nosology could be matched to existing G2P entries. We discovered a number of discrepancies between entries in the Nosology vs G2P. This included spelling errors in OMIM numbers, the use of outdated gene names, or true mismatches due to curation errors on the ISDS or G2P side. Resolving and correcting these errors has already improved the quality of both the ISDS and G2P datasets. 
A bigger problem is the inconsistent use of OMIM identifiers to define disease entities. The ISDS Nosology tends to use a ‘lumping’ approach, combining several disease genes under one phenotype MIM number, while the G2P tends to use the most specific phenotype MIM available. This makes it difficult to map entries from ISDS to G2P and vice versa.

Discrepancies between disease definitions such as the ones we describe here are a big barrier to genomic data integration efforts. We will describe how the MONDO disease ontology (https://mondo.monarchinitiative.org/) can be used to resolve such discrepancies and how the ISDS community can contribute to these efforts.
